From the New York Times, I'm Michael
Bubaro. This is the Daily.
[music]
On Monday afternoon, a federal judge
threw out the criminal charges [music]
that the Trump administration brought
against two of the president's biggest
enemies. today, the unexpected
technicality [music] that doomed the
cases and what the ruling will mean for
Trump's ambitious secondterm [music]
campaign of retribution.
It's [music] Tuesday, November 25th.
Develin, thank you for, as you always
do, dropping everything and coming into
the studio on a breaking news night.
>> Thanks for having me.
>> It's old hat for you at this point.
>> Always tired, never bored. That's my
life.
>> Amen. So, I think it's fair to say that
nothing embodied the progress that
President Trump has been making in his
campaign of retribution against his
enemies, so much as the indictments of
James Comey, the former FBI director,
and Leticia James, the current attorney
general of New York. And just a couple
hours ago, a judge tossed out both of
them in one fell swoop,
>> right? Because this retribution campaign
by the president has delivered some
incredible scalps for the president and
what he wants, but it did so in a very
legally risky way, a very, I think a lot
of people would say factually risky way.
And as important as these cases are and
as alarming as it has been to some
people to see the president publicly
order prosecution of people he doesn't
like.
I think the unanswered question until
Monday was would the court system go
along with this? Would
>> judges go along with this? And the first
cut, and it's not the going to be the
last cut, but the first answer to that
question is an emphatic no.
>> And this may be the first cut, but it's
a deep cut to the president when it
comes to this idea of retribution.
>> It it's a deep cut to the president and
the administration in a couple of ways.
first in the sense that he has lost for
the time being at least these two
centerpiece cases of his drive for
retribution. And it's also a deep cut to
the degree that he is being told that
the way he's running the Justice
Department is not appropriate under the
law is not what the law says you can do
with the Justice Department. M
>> and another way to think about the
significance of this moment is Trump has
publicly declared time and again that
people he doesn't like are criminals and
that they should be prosecuted. A lot of
times the facts in the law of what he's
talking about don't really stand up to
scrutiny. And one of the I think the
great tests of this moment for the legal
system and for the administration is to
what degree does Trump's version of
reality impose its will on the court
system. The courts are about
establishing facts and the courts are
about following the law. Right? The
court's reality here is that these cases
were deeply flawed. So to that point,
let's talk about how these two cases got
to the point where they could be at the
very front end of the system so easily
tossed out and tossed out so quickly.
We've got the Comey case and the James
case. One involves leaking, the other
involves mortgages. Just briefly remind
us about the legal basis for both these
cases.
>> Right. So, let's take a look at who each
of these people are and and what they're
accused of. So, when it comes to James
Comey, he was obviously the FBI director
when Trump became president the first
time, and he oversaw the FBI as it
investigated Russian election
interference, as it investigated the
Trump campaign,
>> which made him enemy number one for
Trump forever.
>> Right. Exactly. I think it's safe to say
that there's no one Trump despises more
than James Comey. And if you fast
forward now to 2025,
there has been a building pressure on
the Justice Department to investigate
and prosecute Comey. And what you saw
over the summer was career prosecutors
taking a look at the evidence that had
been gathered on a range of issues, but
primarily a question of whether he may
have lied in congressional testimony
from 2020.
>> Career prosecutors look at that and say
there's no case here,
>> right? And then in very short order, the
person running that office is forced out
who was a Trump pick themselves and
serving in that role on a temporary
basis. And in his place, the
administration puts Lindseay Halligan.
Lindsay Halligan is a longtime Trump aid
who had no prosecutorial experience
before she was given this assignment to
become the US attorney in the Eastern
District of Virginia.
>> Right. Trump cycles through as many
prosecutors basically as it takes until
he can get someone a loyal aid howigan
it turns out who would bring a charge
against Comey and not just bring a case
against James Comey but also bring a
case against Leticia James the New York
attorney general. The Trump history on
Leticia James is that she pursued him in
court. She sued him in New York and won
a verdict for hundreds of millions of
dollars over business fraud related to
Trump's businesses.
>> And he has been mad about it for a very
long time.
>> Again, you get to this summer and
Justice Department officials are under
pressure to charge Leticia James with
some sort of mortgage fraud. And
eventually once Lindseay Halligan is in
place, Halligan brings an indictment.
>> So Halligan ends up being two for two.
And it's not so much that she's
evaluating what look like super strong
legal cases against Comey or James.
It's that she very much wants to fulfill
the president's desire for an
indictment. That seems to be more or
less the conventional wisdom from the
minute these cases are brought.
>> Well, that's certainly what it looks
like based on what we know. And what we
know is that career prosecutors said,
"Not only do we think this is not a good
case, we don't even think this is a
strong enough case to merit presenting
it to a grand jury."
>> However, a grand jury in both cases
indictes.
>> Correct. And that becomes one of the
bases for this challenge because one of
the things that's very unusual about
both these cases is that a new
prosecutor parachutes in Lindseay Hallan
and within a matter of days delivers
indictments
essentially on her own that her own
office didn't think had merit. So both
Leticia James and James Comey fight back
on a number of legal arguments, but they
share one argument in particular, which
is that Lindsay Hallan's appointment was
never lawful. Is is just
>> not right. She shouldn't be the US
attorney, can't be the US attorney.
>> Why?
>> Because normally what's supposed to
happen is that a US attorney is supposed
to be nominated by a president,
confirmed by a Senate. Mhm.
>> And if for whatever reason that can
happen, you know, there's a process to
pick a temporary replacement for a
limited period of time. And as you might
remember, I already said there was
someone already serving in that role on
a temporary basis. So Lindseay Halligan
becomes sort of a double temporary US
attorney. The defense argument here is
actually a pretty simple one, which is
like you can't just keep adding
temporaries on top of temporaries. At
the same time that lawyers for Comey and
lawyers for James are fighting about the
Hallagan appointment, which is kind of a
technical issue,
>> Mhm.
>> they're also waging a much bigger fight
in some ways over the very premise of
what just happened. Meaning they're
arguing that this is vindictive
prosecution. And they're arguing that
but for Trump's dislike of these two
human beings for political reasons,
there would never have been a criminal
case against either of them. And that's
obviously an important issue in the
whole larger picture of what's happening
at the Justice Department, what's
happening at the Trump administration,
right? They're making an argument that
really gets to the heart of both cases
basically. Does it have any merit? Is it
simply an act of revenge? And if it's
just an act of revenge, isn't that
illegal?
>> Right. And that really came to a head
last week in court when Comey's lawyers
made their case to the judge that this
was just a vindictive prosecution that
this case existed because President
Trump wanted him punished.
>> Well, just describe this hearing. So,
uh, this was a hearing that did not go
well for Lindsay Halligan,
[clears throat] and the judge had a lot
of pointed questions about the grand
jury, how the grand jury actually ended
up voting on this. And at one point, the
judge specifically called Lindseay
Hallan up to answer his questions
directly as opposed to having a
different, more experienced federal
prosecutor answer the questions. Mhm.
>> And in that line of questioning,
Halligan and her associate conceded that
the written final version of the
indictment wasn't exactly the same
paperwork that the grand jury had voted
on.
>> And just explain why that would be a big
deal.
>> Well, it's it's a technical thing, but
obviously a grand jury is supposed to
vote on the indictment that gets filed
to the court. But Lindseay Halligan's
answers seem to raise new doubts as to
whether the grand jury had actually
approved the final version of the case
against Jim Comey. So much so that
Comey's own lawyers immediately popped
up and said, "Your honor, what they just
said is another reason to dismiss this
case."
>> Gotcha.
>> Halligan and the Justice Department's
argument is that this is a a technical
procedural thing. It doesn't affect any
of the substance. That's their argument
to those concerns.
>> Right. But to those of us watching from
home, it felt like if anything was going
to unwind this case, it was probably
going to be a ruling of vindictive
prosecution based off of Lindseay
Haligan's very complicated testimony in
that hearing.
>> Right. I think that hearing really
raised expectations that [music] there
was going to be potentially a seismic
ruling about the whole question, the
whole issue of vindictive prosecution.
[music]
But in fact, on Monday, the first
judge's opinion dismissing these cases
came on the technical issue of Lindseay
Halligan's appointment.
>> [music]
[music]
>> We'll be right back.
So Devlin, walk us through this ruling
that ultimately determines that Lindseay
Halligan is not legally able to have
brought these indictments against either
James Comey or Leticia James.
>> Right. The judge basically agrees with
the arguments Comey and others have made
that you can't have essentially a double
temporary US attorney. And the judge
says that it simply can't be right that
when you don't follow the normal process
for putting a US attorney into that job,
that would sort of negate the whole
purpose of having a rule about this to
begin with.
>> Mhm.
>> So what the judge said was this. It
would mean the government could send any
private citizen off the street into the
grand jury room to secure an indictment
so long as the attorney general gives
her approval after the fact. M
>> that cannot be the law, the judge wrote.
And what she means by that is if you
were to allow this system to continue to
the obvious conclusion, you really
wouldn't have any more Senate confirmed
US attorneys. It would just be the
president picks whoever they want
whenever they want and they they just
keep doing that. Basically, this judge
is saying that the administration has so
diluted the normal process of picking a
US attorney who is of course the local
embodiment of the Justice Department
that the process is completely
disconnected from its original intent.
And like the judge said, basically the
president could put any old person in
that job now.
>> Right. And as part of the legal basis
for making this decision, she cites
explicitly a decision handed up last
year by a different judge in a different
courtroom named Ailen Cannon, who
dismissed the Trump charges for
mishandling classified information
because that judge found that the
prosecutor in that case, a guy named
Jack Smith, was improperly appointed. M
>> and it's an amazing bit of courtroom
karma that that legal argument has now
been used to dismiss an indictment that
the president demanded.
>> Right? It's the ultimate legal boomerang
because the argument used here to
dismiss a case the president wants
against his enemies was used by a judge
to dismiss a case against the president.
It seems like the judge is saying to the
Trump administration, "You should
understand this argument full well. You
won one of your biggest legal victories
based on it."
>> Exactly. And and I'll say, having
attended the hearing that led to this
decision, she brought up that canon
ruling on Jack Smith in the hearing
itself, she flagged it as, "Well, don't
I have to follow the example set by
Judge Cannon in USV Trump?"
>> Mhm. And clearly the Trump
administration did not have a good
answer to that question.
>> So Deon, now that a judge has dismissed
the indictments of Comey and James based
on this more technical argument, what
happens to the more kind of spiritual
argument of vindictive prosecution? Does
that ruling ever happen or once the case
is dismissed, does that ruling just get
tossed aside? I think that issue is just
sort of in a coma unless and until this
case is revived without a higher court
deciding no this indictment should exist
again I don't think you can have
arguments or have a ruling about the
vindictive prosecution question.
>> So for now that argument's in limbo but
I wonder if you can help us understand
whether any of this case will ever come
out of your so-called coma. Could the
administration try to bring these
indictments back again?
>> Well, they certainly could because the
judge dismissed both of them with what's
called without prejudice. There are two
ways to dismiss a case. One is with
prejudice, which means you cannot refile
this no matter what.
>> And the other is without prejudice. And
so, which means you can refile. And
these cases were dismissed without
prejudice.
>> Got it. So there is still an avenue
here, at least in theory, for
prosecutors to try again.
>> I think as far as reviving these cases,
I have no doubt the desire is there on
Trump's part. I think the question is if
you're the Justice Department, if you're
Trump's Justice Department, how do you
balance the desire to appeal, the desire
to fight this decision with the more
practical question of okay, so if
Lindseay Hallan isn't the US attorney,
who is
>> and who exists within the government
that might even be willing to try to
take a second shot at the grand jury
with these cases. this becomes
potentially another search for the
prosecutor who will you know pursue this
case yet again
>> and Delin in all likelihood it's
probably going to be another temporary
US attorney because as you just said the
career prosecutors don't want to bring
these cases so is it possible that the
basis for tossing out these cases as
technical as it might seem becomes a
broader rejection of the entire Trump
administration strategy of picking
pretty inexperienced allies of the
president to bring the cases against his
enemies that he wants that the rest of
the Justice Department system is really
resistant to bringing.
It's entirely possible and and so there
are a lot of question marks here as to
what will the administration's next
steps be because they have pushed the
department into a bunch of situations
and scenarios that really haven't been
contemplated before. Well, I wonder
where this ends up leaving the
president's vision for retribution
because it was always our understanding
that in the second term he learned from
the mistakes of the first and in the
first term he really struggled to carry
out retribution. In the second term he
was going to appoint people who were
willing to do what he wanted against his
enemies and who were supposed to be
qualified to do it. And this ruling
suggests that's not really the case. So,
this is obviously a very important set
of rulings by this judge, and I think
they represent a major setback for the
president's retribution campaign against
his enemies. But I also think it's a
trap to think that in court that the
thing that just happened is the most
important thing is the decisive thing. M
>> and so I don't think this is going to be
the final word or the final indicator of
of anything to do with the president's
retribution campaign. For instance, if
you look in Florida, the Justice
Department is putting together an
investigative prosecutive effort that's
trying to pull together all these
different parts of what Trump supporters
argue is a great conspiracy against him,
>> stretching back to his first campaign
for president and trying to build that
effort
>> specifically under the opaces of Judge
Ailen Cannon, the the judge who threw
out the charges against Donald Trump.
>> Right? The thinking here seems to be if
you can't find a prosecutor who will do
this work of retribution, then go find a
judge who will.
>> Right? [music]
Which is why I say I think it's a
mistake to assume that this ruling will
stop efforts at retribution, efforts at
payback, because I think the Trump
administration's made clear they're
going to keep looking for cases [music]
and places to pursue retribution.
>> [music]
>> Well, Din, thank you very much. Thank
you.
>> I'm grateful that the court ended the
case against me, which was a prosecution
based on malevolence and incompetence
and a reflection of what the Department
of Justice has become under Donald
Trump, which is heartbreaking.
>> On Monday night, James Comey released a
video about the dismissal of his
indictment. In it, Comey said that he
expects President Trump to come after
him again, but that he believes an
independent federal judiciary would
protect him and anyone else targeted for
retribution by the president.
This case mattered to me personally,
obviously, but it matters most because a
message has to be sent [music] that the
president of the United States cannot
use the Department of Justice [music] to
target his political enemies. I don't
care what your politics are. You have to
see that is fundamentally unamerican
[music] and a threat to the rule of law
that keeps all of us free.
[music]
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to [music]
know today. In its latest act of
retribution, the Trump administration
opened an investigation [music]
of Democratic Senator Mark Kelly of
Arizona over allegations that his
participation in a video statement
[music] to members of the US military
was an act of official misconduct.
[music] Kelly, a retired Navy captain
and astronaut, was one of six [music]
Democratic lawmakers who, in the video,
told American troops that they have the
right to ignore illegal orders. issued
by Trump. A message that [music] has
infuriated the president. As a result,
the Defense Department is [music] now
investigating whether Kelly violated the
military's code of justice, which
applies to retired service [music]
members. In theory, Kelly could be
recalled to active duty or disciplined,
a possibility that legal [music] experts
said was both remote and legally
dubious.
>> [music]
>> Today's episode was produced by Relle
[music] Bonja, Diana Wyn, Mary Wilson,
and Rob Zipco. It was edited by Lexi
[music] Diao and Rachel Quester.
Contains music by Alicia and Marian
Lozano and was engineered by Chris Wood.
That's it for the daily. I'm Michael
Lavaro. See you tomorrow.